Update CHANGELOG.md for 6.4 (#3847)
ROCm/AMDMIGraphX: CHANGELOG.md

Full documentation for MIGraphX is available at
[https://rocmdocs.amd.com/projects/AMDMIGraphX/en/latest/](https://rocmdocs.amd.com/projects/AMDMIGraphX/en/latest/).

## MIGraphX 2.12 for ROCm 6.4.0

### Added

* Support for gfx1200 and gfx1201
* hipBLASLt support for contiguous transpose GEMM fusion and GEMM pointwise fusions for improved performance

> * Support for hardware specific FP8 datatypes (FP8 OCP and FP8 FNUZ)

Reviewer: Because below everything starts with "added", this either needs to start with "added" or nothing needs to start with "added". It's easier to add "added" to these three lines

* Add support for the BF16 datatype
* ONNX Operator Support for `com.microsoft.MultiHeadAttention`, `com.microsoft.NhwcConv`, and `com.microsoft.MatMulIntgerFloat`
* migraphx-driver can now produce outfor for use with Netron
* migraphx-driver now includes a `time` parameter (similar to `perf`) that is more accurate for very fast kernels
* An end-to-end Stable Diffusion 3 example with option to disable T5 encoder on VRAM-limited GPUs has been added
* Added support to track broadcast axes in `shape_transform_descriptor`
* Added support for unsigned types with `rocMLIR`
* Added a script to convert mxr files to ONNX models
* Added the `MIGRAPHX_SET_GEMM_PROVIDER` environment variable to choose between rocBLAS and hipBLASLt. Set `MIGRAPHX_SET_GEMM_PROVIDER` to `rocblas` to use rocBLAS, or to `hipblaslt` to use hipBLASLt.

### Changed

* With the exception of gfx90a, switched to using hipBLASLt instead of rocBLAS
* Included the min/max/median of the `perf` run as part of the summary report
* Enable non-packed inputs for `rocMLIR`
* Always output a packed type for q/dq after determining non-packed tensors were inefficient

> * Even if using NHWC, MIGraphX will always convert group convolutions to NCHW for best performance 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* MIGraphX will always convert group convolutions to NCHW for best performance, including when using NHWC. 
```

* Minimum version of Cmake is now 3.27

### Removed

* Removed `fp8e5m2fnuz` rocBLAS support
* `__AMDGCN_WAVEFRONT_SIZE` has been deprecated.
* Removed a warning that printed to stdout when using FP8 types
* Remove zero point parameter for dequantizelinear when its zero

### Optimized

* Prefill buffers when MLIR produces a multioutput buffer
* Improved the resize operator performance which should improve overall performance of models that use it
* Allow the `reduce` operator to be split across an axis to improve fusion performance.  The `MIGRAPHX_SPLIT_REDUCE_SIZE` environment variable has been added to allow the minimum size of the reduction to be adjusted for a possible model specific performance improvement
* Added `MIGRAPHX_DISABLE_PASSES` environment variable for debugging
* Added `MIGRAPHX_MLIR_DUMP` environment variable to be set to a folder where individual final rocMLIR modules can be saved for investigation
* Improved the C++ API to allow onnxruntime access to fp8 quantization

### Resolved Issues

* Fixed multistream execution with larger models (#3757)
* Peephole LSTM Error (#3768)
* Fixed BertSquad example that could include a broken tokenizers package (#3556)

> * Fixed Attention fusion ito not error with a shape mismatch when a trailing pointwise contains a literal (#3758)

Reviewer: Is this a typo or is it something that needs to be in quotes/preformatted text?

Full documentation for MIGraphX is available at
[https://rocmdocs.amd.com/projects/AMDMIGraphX/en/latest/](https://rocmdocs.amd.com/projects/AMDMIGraphX/en/latest/).

## MIGraphX 2.12 for ROCm 6.4.0

### Added

* Support for gfx1200 and gfx1201

> * hipBlasLt support 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* hipBLASLt support 
```

  * Added contiguous transpose gemm fusion for hipBLASLt
  * Added gemm pointwise fusion for hipBLASLt
  * Made gfx90a use rocBLAS by default

> * Support for rdware specific FP8 datatypes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Support for hardware specific FP8 datatypes
```

  * Added the fp8e5m2fnuz data type
  * Added support on gfx120x for the FP8 OCP format
  * Enable GEMM/dot for FP8 using hipblasLT
* Add support for the BF16 datatype
* ONNX Operator Support
  * Add onnx support for com.microsoft.MultiHeadAttention
  * Add onnx support for com.microsoft.NhwcConv
  * Add onnx support for com.microsoft.MatMulIntgerFloat
* migraphx-driver improvements 
  * can now produce output for use with Netron
  * Added a `time` for better accuracy of very fast kernels
  * Included percentile details to summary report
* end-to-end Stable Diffusion 3 example with option to disable T5 encoder on VRAM-limited GPUs
* Fusions...
  * Fuse transposes in pointwise and reduce fusions
  * Fuse reshapes across concat
  * Fuse unpack_int4 across concat
  * Horizontally fuse elementwise operators with more then 2 inputs across concat
  * Fuse all pointwise inputs with mlir not just the first one found
* Enable non-packed inputs for mlir
* Track broadcast axes in the shape_transform_descriptor
* Disable dot/mul optimizations when there is int4 weights
* Add support for unsigned types with mlir
* Added a script to convert mxr files to ONNX models

> * New environment variable to choose between rocBLAS and hipBLASLT; MIGRAPHX_SET_GEMM_PROVIDER=rocblas|hipblaslt for supported architectures

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* New environment variable to choose between rocBLAS and hipBLASLt;
  MIGRAPHX_SET_GEMM_PROVIDER=rocblas|hipblaslt for supported architectures
```

### Changed

* Switched to using hipBLASLt as default instead of rocBLAS for hipBLASLt supported architectures.
* Always output a packed type for q/dq
* Removed a warning that printed to stdout when using FP8 types
* Set migraphx version to 2.12
* Always use NCHW for group convolutions
* Remove zero point parameter for dequantizelinear when its zero
* Dont use mixed layouts with convolutions
* Update Cmake to 3.27.x since ORT 1.21 required a newer CMake to not break pybind

### Removed

* Disable fp8e5m2fnuz with rocBLAS
* Removed __AMDGCN_WAVEFRONT_SIZE for deprecation
* Removed environment variable MIGRAPHX_ENABLE_HIPBLASLT_GEMM.

### Optimized

* Refactor GPU math functions for an accuracy improvement 
* catch python buffer unsupported types
* Prefill buffers when MLIR produces a multioutput buffer
* Improved the performance of the resize operator
* Enable split reduce by default

> * Added a MIGRAPHX_DISABLE_PASSES enviroment variable for debugging

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Added MIGRAPHX_DISABLE_PASSES environment variable for debugging
```

Full documentation for MIGraphX is available at
[https://rocmdocs.amd.com/projects/AMDMIGraphX/en/latest/](https://rocmdocs.amd.com/projects/AMDMIGraphX/en/latest/).

## MIGraphX 2.12 for ROCm 6.4.0

### Added

* Support for gfx1200 and gfx1201

> * hipBLASLt support 

Author: it's an entire library that we now have support for.  The sub bullets were some of the features we are using from the library.  

Added:
- hipBLASLt support for contiguous transpose GEMM fusion and GEMM pointwise fusions for improved performance
Changed:
- With the exception of gfx90a, switched to using hipBLASLt instead of rocBLAS.

  * Added contiguous transpose gemm fusion for hipBLASLt
  * Added gemm pointwise fusion for hipBLASLt
  * Made gfx90a use rocBLAS by default

> * Support for hardware specific FP8 datatypes

Author: done

  * Driver quantize fp8 update

>   * FP8 OCP to FP8 FNUZ on hardware with only FP8 FNUZ support

Reviewer: Was FP8 OCP added to FP8 FNUZ? Because that's what it reads like.

I'm guessing this actually means that you've added conversion from OCP FP8 to FNUZ FP8 for hardware that only supports FNUZ.

In either case, it needs to be clarified.

Author: removed the sub bullets.  and clarified by... 
* Support for hardware specific FP8 datatypes (FP8 OCP and FP8 FNUZ)

>   * Added the bit_cast operator for fp8 OCP

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Added an OCP FP8 `bit_cast` operator
 ```

Author: n/a

>   * Added the fp8e5m2fnuz data type

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Added the `fp8e5m2fnuz` data type
```

Author: n/a now

>   * Added support on gfx120x for the FP8 OCP format

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Added support for OCP FP8 on gfx120x
 ```

Author: n/a now

>   * Enable GEMM/dot for FP8 using hipblasLT

Reviewer: Is GEMM/dot a GEMM dot product? 

Was it added or enabled?

Was it present/enabled for other data types with hipBLASLt? 
Was it present/enabled for FP8 but not on hipBLASLt?

This needs to be clarified.

Author: It fused the GEMM to a multiply.  This was possible before the introduction of hipblaslt.  Since I removed the sub bullets this isn't applicable anymore

* Add support for the BF16 datatype

> * ONNX Operator Support

Reviewer: remove and flatten list.

Author: done

>   * Add onnx support for com.microsoft.MultiHeadAttention

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Add onnx support for `com.microsoft.MultiHeadAttention`, `com.microsoft.NhwcConv`, and `com.microsoft.MatMulIntgerFloat`.
```

>   * Add onnx support for com.microsoft.NhwcConv

Reviewer: combined with first point. can be removed.

Author: done

>   * Add onnx support for com.microsoft.MatMulIntgerFloat

Reviewer: combined with previous point into first point. can be removed.

Author: done

> * migraphx-driver improvements 

Reviewer: remove and flatten list.

Author: done

>   * can now produce output for use with Netron

Reviewer: Is this an addition or a change? It feels like a change, but I'll leave it up to you.

```suggestion
  * migraphx-driver now produces output for use with Netron
```

Author: We added the ability to have the program output in a Netron readable form.  Since that feature didn't exist before I thought the Added section made the most sense

>   * Added a `time` for better accuracy of very fast kernels

Reviewer: Is `time` a variable? data type? function? this needs to be specified.

Author: -  migraphx-driver now incldues a `time` parameter (similar to `perf`) that is more accurate for very fast kernels

>   * Included percentile details to summary report

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Percentile details have been added to summary reports.
```

is it one summary report or several?

and percentile details about what?

context is important for users.

Author: I moved this to Changed
- Included the min/max/median of the `perf` run as part of the summary report

> * end-to-end Stable Diffusion 3 example with option to disable T5 encoder on VRAM-limited GPUs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* An end-to-end Stable Diffusion 3 example with option to disable T5 encoder on VRAM-limited GPUs has been added.
```

Author: Done

> * Fusions...

Reviewer: remove.

  * Fuse transposes in pointwise and reduce fusions
  * Fuse reshapes across concat

>   * Fuse unpack_int4 across concat

Reviewer: These three fusion items are confusing to me. Are these three functions or operations that have been added? This needs more detail and more specificity.

Author: I removed the section completely.

>   * Horizontally fuse elementwise operators with more then 2 inputs across concat

Reviewer: Was this added to something? To a class or a function? Needs to be specified.

>   * Fuse all pointwise inputs with mlir not just the first one found

Reviewer: Same comment as above: needs more specificity and context.

> * Enable non-packed inputs for mlir

Reviewer: When something is enabled, it sounds more like a change. 

```suggestion
* Enables non-packed inputs for `mlir`
```

Author: Moved to Changed section

> * Track broadcast axes in the shape_transform_descriptor

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Added support to track broadcast axes in `shape_transform_descriptor`
```

Author: done

> * Disable dot/mul optimizations when there is int4 weights

Reviewer: This isn't an addition. It should either be in changes or removals.

```suggestion
* Disabled dot and mul optimizations when using `int4` weights
```

also: when using `int4` weights where? this needs context.

Author: since this is the first release about int4 it could be removed completely

> * Add support for unsigned types with mlir

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Added support for unsigned types with `mlir`
```

* Added a script to convert mxr files to ONNX models

> * New environment variable to choose between rocBLAS and hipBLASLt;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Added the `MIGRAPHX_SET_GEMM_PROVIDER` environment variable to choose between rocBLAS and hipBLASLt. Set `MIGRAPHX_SET_GEMM_PROVIDER` to `rocblas` to use rocBLAS, or to `hipblaslt` to use hipBLASLt.
```

Author: done

>   MIGRAPHX_SET_GEMM_PROVIDER=rocblas|hipblaslt for supported architectures

Reviewer: can be removed

Author: done

### Changed

> * Switched to using hipBLASLt as default instead of rocBLAS for hipBLASLt supported architectures.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Switched to using hipBLASLt for hipBLASLt supported architectures, as default, instead of rocBLAS.
```

> * Switched to using hipBLASLt as default instead of rocBLAS for hipBLASLt supported architectures.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* hipBLASLt has replaced rocBLAS as the default on supported architectures.
```

Author: changed differently

> * Always output a packed type for q/dq

Reviewer: need to specify what outputs a packed type and how this differs from how it was previously.

Author: - Always output a packed type for q/dq after determining non-packed tensors were inefficient

> * Removed a warning that printed to stdout when using FP8 types

Reviewer: This sounds more like a fix than a change. And also the thing that produced the warning -- and the warning itself -- need to be specified.

Author: agree, it has been moved

> * Set migraphx version to 2.12

Reviewer: This can be removed. The user can see that the version has changed.

> * Always use NCHW for group convolutions

Reviewer: How has this changed from before? Context and specificity is required.

Author: We added NHWC in 6.3 so no matter what, group convolutions will be moved to NCHW.
- Even if using NHWC, MIGraphX will always convert group convolutions to  NCHW for best performance

> * Remove zero point parameter for dequantizelinear when its zero

Reviewer: Is this a change or a removal?

Also this needs context.

> * Dont use mixed layouts with convolutions

Reviewer: Is this a change or a directive to the user? This needs to be rewritten to clarify what is meant.

Author: Internal code.
- Renamed the `layout_nhwc` to `layout_convolution` and ensured that either the weights are the same layout as the inputs or set the input and weights to NHWC

> * Update Cmake to 3.27.x since ORT 1.21 required a newer CMake to not break pybind

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Minimum version of Cmake is now 3.27
```

The details of why aren't necessary.

Author: done

### Removed

> * Disable fp8e5m2fnuz with rocBLAS

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Removed `fp8e5m2fnuz` rocBLAS support
```

> * Removed __AMDGCN_WAVEFRONT_SIZE for deprecation

Reviewer: Was this deprecated or removed? I'm going to assume it's been deprecated.

```suggestion
* `__AMDGCN_WAVEFRONT_SIZE` has been deprecated.
```

Author: Done

> * Removed environment variable MIGRAPHX_ENABLE_HIPBLASLT_GEMM.

Reviewer: Was this env var in an MIGraphX release? Because I don't remember seeing it when I was doing doc work for 6.3. If it wasn't in a release version, this line should be removed.

Author: done

### Optimized

> * Refactor GPU math functions for an accuracy improvement 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* GPU math functions have been refactored to improve accuracy.
```

Can the specific functions be mentioned? And can the accuracy improvement be mentioned?

Author: Removed since it is not client accessible

> * catch python buffer unsupported types

Reviewer: This sounds internal. Is this something the user needs to know about? In which cases, how this is relevant to the user needs to be specified.

Author: removed

> * Prefill buffers when MLIR produces a multioutput buffer

Reviewer: Again, this sounds internal. Is there an appreciable difference for the end user? That needs to be the focus.

Also: is it mlir or MLIR?

Author: the real name is rocMLIR.  I changed it to be rocMLIR in the file

> * Improved the performance of the resize operator

Reviewer: What is the impact on the user?

Author: models that have a resize operator will see an improvement.   So perhaps...

- Improved the resize operator performance which should improve overall performance of models that use it

> * Enable split reduce by default

Reviewer: How does this affect the end user and where was split reduce made the default?

Author: - Allow the reduce operator to be split across an axis to improve fusion performance.  The MIGRAPHX_SPLIT_REDUCE_SIZE environment variable  has been added to allow the minimum size of  the reduction  to be adjusted for a possible model specific performance improvement

> * Added MIGRAPHX_DISABLE_PASSES environment variable for debugging

Reviewer: This should be in additions and there should be some instruction on how it should be used.

```suggestion
* Added the `MIGRAPHX_DISABLE_PASSES` environment variable for debugging
```

Author: done

> * Added a MIGRAPHX_MLIR_DUMP_TO_FILE flag to capture the final mlir module to a file

Reviewer: This is an addition, not an optimization. 

How is this flag used? That needs to be specified.

Author: - Added `MIGRAPHX_MLIR_DUMP` environment variable to be set to a folder where individual final mlir modules can be saved for investigation

> * Move qlinear before concat to allow output fusion

Reviewer: This sounds like it might be internal. How does this affect the user?

Author: we made the change to allow the code to connect a larger fusion.  Yes this is internal work.

Author: removed

> * use reshape to handle Flatten operator

Reviewer: This needs context. How does this affect the user?

Author: Reworded and moved to `Resolved Issues`
- Fixed a bug were some models could fail to compile with an error `flatten: Shapes are not in standard layout` (#3579)

> * Improved documentation by cleaning up links and adding a Table Of Contents

Reviewer: This can be removed.

Author: done

> * Updated cpp code guideline checks

Reviewer: This needs more context on how this is an optimization.

Author: It's part of the CI checks during a build.  I removed it

> * Brokeout the fp8_quantization functions via our API to allow onnxruntime to use fp8 quantization

Reviewer: This sounds like an internal note. Can this be rewritten?

Author: - Improved the C++ API to allow onnxruntime access to fp8 quantization

> ### Resolved Issues

Reviewer: The resolved issues need more context. If they have counterparts in earlier changelogs (in known issues) or GitHub issue numbers, they can be cross-referenced to those.

Author: I added the Issue numbers

* Fixed multistream execution with larger models

> * Fixed broken links in the documentation

Reviewer: Can be removed.
